vmware: vmware_guidelines.rst (#56814)
ansible/ansible: docs/docsite/rst/dev_guide/platforms/vmware_guidelines.rst

.. _VMware_module_development:

****************************************
Guidelines for VMware module development
****************************************

The VMware modules and these guidelines are maintained by the VMware Working Group. For

> further information see the team community page: `https://github.com/ansible/community/wiki/VMware`.

Reviewer: I'd make this a link, save some copying and pasting:

```suggestion
further information see the `team community page <https://github.com/ansible/community/wiki/VMware>`_.
```

.. contents::
   :local:

Testing with vcsim
==================

Most of the existing modules are covered by functional tests. The tests are located in the :file:`test/integration/targets/`.

> By default, the tests run against a vCenter API simulator called `govcsim <https://github.com/vmware/govmomi/tree/master/vcsim>`. ``ansible-test`` will automatically pull a `govcsim container <https://quay.io/repository/ansible/vcenter-test-container>` and use it to set-up the test environment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, the tests run against a vCenter API simulator called `vcsim <https://github.com/vmware/govmomi/tree/master/vcsim>`_. ``ansible-test`` will automatically pull a `vcsim container <https://quay.io/repository/ansible/vcenter-test-container>` and use it to set-up the test environment.
```

You can trigger the test of a module manually with the ``ansible-test`` command. For example, to trigger ``vcenter_folder`` tests:

.. code-block:: shell

    source hacking/env-setup
    ansible-test integration --python 3.7 vcenter_folder

``vcsim`` is handy because it's much more fast that than a regular test environment. However, it does not
support all the ESXi or vcenter features.

Testing with your own infrastructure
====================================

You can also target a regular VMware environment. This paragraph explains step by step how you can run the test-suite yourself.

Requirements
------------

- 2 ESXi hosts (6.5 or 6.7)
   - with 2 NIC, the second ones should be available for the test
- a VCSA host
- a NFS server

> You will need to install a couple of Python dependencies, like `pyvmomi <https://github.com/vmware/pyvmomi/tree/master/pyVmomi>` and `requests <https://2.python-requests.org/en/master/>`.

Reviewer: I'd change this to be part of the list of Requirements:
- an NFS server
- Python dependencies
   - pyvmomi
   - requests

Author: I agree, it sounds more logical.

> If you want to deploy your test environment in a hypervisor, VMware and Libvirt <https://github.com/goneri/vmware-on-libvirt> are know for working fine.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you want to deploy your test environment in a hypervisor, both VMware or Libvirt <https://github.com/goneri/vmware-on-libvirt> work well.
```

NFS server configuration
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Your NFS server must expose the following directory structure:

.. code-block:: shell

    $ tree /srv/share/
    /srv/share/
    ├── isos
    │   ├── base.iso
    │   ├── centos.iso
    │   └── fedora.iso
    └── vms
    2 directories, 3 files

On a Linux system, you can expose the directory over NFS with the following export file:

.. code-block:: shell

    $ cat /etc/exports
    /srv/share  192.168.122.0/255.255.255.0(rw,anonuid=1000,anongid=1000)

.. note::

    With this configuration all the new files will be owned by the user with the UID and GID 1000/1000.

>     Adjust the configuration according to your local configuration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Adjust the configuration to match your user's UID/GID.
```

The service can be enabled with:

.. code-block:: shell

   $ sudo systemctl enable --now nfs-server

Configure your installation
---------------------------

> For this purpose, you need to prepare a configuration file that describes your set-up. The file

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Prepare a configuration file that describes your set-up. The file
```

should be called :file:`test/integration/cloud-config-vcenter.ini` and based on
:file:`test/integration/cloud-config-vcenter.ini.template`. For instance, if you've deployed your lab with
`vmware-on-libvirt <https://github.com/goneri/vmware-on-libvirt>`:

.. code-block:: ini

    [DEFAULT]
    vcenter_username: administrator@vsphere.local
    vcenter_password: !234AaAa56
    vcenter_hostname: vcenter.test
    vmware_validate_certs: false
    esxi1_username: root
    esxi1_hostname: esxi1.test
    esxi1_password: root
    esxi2_username: root
    esxi2_hostname: test2.test
    esxi2_password: root

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

If you use an HTTP proxy
-------------------------
```

> If your test-infrastructure is behinf a HTTP proxy, you will need the following extra pull-requests:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Support for hosting test infrastructure behind an HTTP proxy is currently in development. See the following pull requests for more information:
```

> - ansible-test: vcenter behind a HTTP proxy <https://github.com/ansible/ansible/pull/58208>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- ansible-test: vcenter behind an HTTP proxy <https://github.com/ansible/ansible/pull/58208>
```

> - pyvmomi Proxy support <https://github.com/vmware/pyvmomi/pull/799>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- pyvmomi: proxy support <https://github.com/vmware/pyvmomi/pull/799>
```

- VMware: add support for HTTP proxy in connection API <https://github.com/ansible/ansible/pull/52936>

> The specify the location of the proxy server with the two extra keys:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once you have incorporated the code from those PRs, specify the location of the proxy server with the two extra keys:
```

.. code-block:: ini

    vmware_proxy_host: esxi1-gw.ws.testing.ansible.com
    vmware_proxy_port: 11153

In addition, you may need to adjust the variables of the following file to match the configuration of your lab:
:file:`test/integration/targets/prepare_vmware_tests/vars/real_lab.yml`. If you use `vmware-on-libvirt <https://github.com/goneri/vmware-on-libvirt>` to prepare you lab, you don't have anything to change.

Run the test-suite
------------------

Once your configuration is ready, you can trigger a run with the following command:

.. code-block:: shell

    source hacking/env-setup
    VMWARE_TEST_PLATFORM=static ansible-test integration --python 3.7 vmware_host_firewall_manager

``vmware_host_firewall_manager`` is the name of the module to test.

Unit-test
=========

> The VMware modules come with a limited unit-test coverage, you can run the test-suite with the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The VMware modules have limited unit-test coverage. You can run the test suite with the
```

following commands:

.. code-block:: shell

    source hacking/env-setup
    ansible-test units --tox --python 3.7 '.*vmware.*'

Code style and best practice
============================

datacenter argument with ESXi
-----------------------------

> ``datacenter`` parameter should not use ``ha-datacenter`` by default. This is because the user may

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The ``datacenter`` parameter should not use ``ha-datacenter`` by default. This is because the user may
```

not realize that Ansible silently targets the wrong data center.

esxi_hostname should not be mandatory
-------------------------------------

Depending upon the functionality provided by ESXi or vCenter, some modules can seamlessly work with both. In this case,
``esxi_hostname`` parameter should be optional.

.. code-block:: python

    if self.is_vcenter():
        esxi_hostname = module.params.get('esxi_hostname')
        if not esxi_hostname:
            self.module.fail_json("esxi_hostname parameter is mandatory")
        self.host = self.get_all_host_objs(cluster_name=cluster_name, esxi_host_name=esxi_hostname)[0]
    else:
        self.host = find_obj(self.content, [vim.HostSystem], None)
    if self.host is None:
        self.module.fail_json(msg="Failed to find host system.")

Typographic convention
======================

Nomenclature
------------

We try to enforce the following rules in our documentation:

- VMware, not VMWare or vmware
- ESXi, not esxi

> - VCenter, not vcenter

Reviewer: Based on the comments above, I thought the correct capitalization was `vCenter` . . . if I'm correct:

```suggestion
- vCenter, not vcenter
```

Author: oh, thanks @acozine for your review. You're right, it looks so much better.

.. _VMware_module_development:

***********************************************

> Guidelines for VMware module module development

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Guidelines for VMware module development
```

Author: done

***********************************************

> The VWware modules and these guidelines are maintained by the VMware Working Group.  For

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The VMware modules and these guidelines are maintained by the VMware Working Group.  For
```

Author: done

> further information the team community page: `https://github.com/ansible/community/wiki/VMware`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
further information see the team community page: `https://github.com/ansible/community/wiki/VMware`.
```

Author: done

.. contents::
   :local:

Testing
=======

Most of the existing modules are covered by functional tests. The tests are located in the :file:`test/integration/targets/`.

Test environment
----------------

> By default, the tests are run against a vcenter API simulator called `vcsim <https://github.com/vmware/govmomi/tree/master/vcsim>`. ``ansible-test`` will automatically pull a vcsim container and use it to set-up the test environment.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
By default, the tests run against a vCenter API simulator called `govcsim <https://github.com/vmware/govmomi/tree/master/vcsim>`. ``ansible-test`` will automatically pull a `govcsim container <https://quay.io/repository/ansible/vcenter-test-container>` and use it to set-up the test environment.
```

Author: Thanks

You can trigger the test of a module manually with the ``ansible-test`` command. For example, to trigger ``vcenter_folder`` tests:

.. code-block:: shell

    source hacking/env-setup
    ansible-test integration --python 3.7 vcenter_folder

> You will need to install a couple of Python dependencies, like pyVim, pyvmomi and requests.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You will need to install a couple of Python dependencies, like `pyvmomi <https://github.com/vmware/pyvmomi/tree/master/pyVmomi>` and `requests <https://2.python-requests.org/en/master/>`.
```

> ``vcsim`` is handy because it's much more fast that than a regular test environment. However, it does not

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
``govcsim`` is handy because it's much faster that than a regular test environment. However, it does not
```

Author: Applied

Reviewer: I'm confused by the difference between `govcsim` and `vcsim` - the project name and repo both use `vcsim`, though, so that's what I think we should use here.

Author: I personaly use `vcsim` too, I believe it's clear enough.

> support all the ESXi or vcenter features.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
support all the ESXi or vCenter features.
```

Author: Ok, I added a `typographic convention` section in the doc :-).

> When `PR #55772 <https://github.com/ansible/ansible/pull/55772>` and `PR #56605 <https://github.com/ansible/ansible/pull/56605>` will be merged, you will also be able

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When _`PR #55772 <https://github.com/ansible/ansible/pull/55772>`_ and _`PR #56605 <https://github.com/ansible/ansible/pull/56605>`_ are merged, you will also be able
```

Reviewer 4: 55772 is merged now.

Author: done

to target a regular VMware environment.

> For this purpose, you need to prepare a configuration file that discribe your set-up. The file

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For this purpose, you need to prepare a configuration file that describes your set-up. The file
```

should be called :file:`test/integration/cloud-config-vcenter.ini` and based on
:file:`test/integration/cloud-config-vcenter.ini.template`.

> In addition to this file, you may need to adjust to match the configuration of your lab

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
In addition, you may need to adjust the variables in the following file to match the configuration of your lab
```

:file:`test/integration/targets/prepare_vmware_tests/vars/real_lab.yml`.

Once your configuration is ready, you can trigger a run with the following command:

.. code-block:: shell

    source hacking/env-setup

>     env VMWARE_TEST_PLATFORM=worldstream ansible-test integration --python 3.7 vmware_host_firewall_manager

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    ansible-test integration --python 3.7 vmware_host_firewall_manager
```
The worldstream env var is only needed if using the dynamic baremetal provisioner.  A static config file will take precedence over the env var, but it's just not needed and could cause confusion.
https://github.com/ansible/ansible/blob/devel/test/runner/lib/cloud/vcenter.py#L104-L107
I'm not sure where would be the right place to document how to run tests on worldstream if you have a CI key since it isn't obvious, I don't see (for comparison) that we outline that in the AWS guide. @acozine might be able to suggest something?

Author: I think this will evolve soon, I will keep it unchanged for now.

> convention and best practice

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Convention and best practice
```

============================

datacenter argument with ESXi
-----------------------------

> ``datacenter`` parameter should not use ``ha-datacenter`` by default. This because the user may

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
``datacenter`` parameter should not use ``ha-datacenter`` by default. This is because the user may
```

> not realize that Ansible silently target the wrong datacenter.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
not realize that Ansible silently targets the wrong data center.
```

Author: Thanks @samccann, since datacenter has a specific meaning in the VMware world, I prefer to keep it unchanged.

esxi_hostname should not be mandatory
-------------------------------------

> Some modules can seamlessly works with a vcenter or an ESXi.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Some modules can seamlessly work with vCenter or an ESXi (depending upon the functionality provided by ESXi or vCenter)
```

Author: I rephrased to: Depending upon the functionality provided by ESXi or vCenter, some modules can seamlessly work with both.

.. code-block:: python

    if self.is_vcenter():
        esxi_hostname = module.params.get('esxi_hostname')
        if not esxi_hostname:
            self.module.fail_json("esxi_hostname parameter is mandatory")

>         )

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion

```

Author: oops

.. code-block:: shell

    source hacking/env-setup
    env VMWARE_TEST_PLATFORM=worldstream ansible-test integration --python 3.7 vmware_host_firewall_manager

Code style and best practice
============================

datacenter argument with ESXi
-----------------------------

``datacenter`` parameter should not use ``ha-datacenter`` by default. This is because the user may
not realize that Ansible silently targets the wrong data center.

esxi_hostname should not be mandatory
-------------------------------------

Depending upon the functionality provided by ESXi or vCenter, some modules can seamlessly work with both.

.. code-block:: python

    if self.is_vcenter():
        esxi_hostname = module.params.get('esxi_hostname')
        if not esxi_hostname:
            self.module.fail_json("esxi_hostname parameter is mandatory")
        self.host = self.get_all_host_objs(cluster_name=cluster_name, esxi_host_name=esxi_hostname)[0]
    else:
        self.host = find_obj(self.content, [vim.HostSystem], None)
    if self.host is None:
        self.module.fail_json(msg="Failed to find host system.")

Nomencalture

Typographic convention
======================

> We try to enforce the following rules when in our documentations:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We try to enforce the following rules in our documentation:
```

Author: thanks!
